---
layout: post
title: Lambda
---

[PHP][1] has been in dire need of some new features for some time. PHP 5.3 plans to add a [slew of new features][2], *finally* adding lambdas a/k/a *anonymous functions* to the language.

That is... ...once it gets out of alpha. Then out of beta. Then onto
production systems.

(PHP haters can now stop sipping quite so much hater-ade in that PHP now also
supports namespaces, but I don't find that new feature particularly
interesting.)

What makes lambdas so interesting is how much simpler and cleaner they can
make your code.

Consider the problem of wanting to sort a list where some of the items have
the words 'The' or 'A' as a prefix. We want to sort the list

 *  Beck
 *  The Starting Line
 *  Blue October
 *  The All American Rejects

to be

 *  The All American Rejects
 *  Beck
 *  Blue October
 *  The Starting Line

and **not**

 *  Beck
 *  Blue October
 *  The All American Rejects
 *  The Starting Line

Without the use of lambdas, we have to do something like this in *old* PHP:

    function stem_the($a)
    {
        return preg_replace( 
        '/^(a|the) *(.*)$/i, '$2', $a 
        );
    }
    
    function cmp_the($a,$b)
    {
        $a = stem_the($a);
        $b = stem_the($b);
        return strcmp($a,$b);
    }
    
    $bands = array( 'The All American Rejects',
            'Beck', 'Blue October',
            'The Starting Line' );
    
    usort( $bands, 'cmp_the' );

`usort()`'s second argument is a **string**. This is really ugly. *Old* PHP
didn't have functions as first-class citizens, so that *was* the only way we
could do something like this. It's *ugly* and *slow*.

Moreover, we're forced to create two functions `stem_the()` and `cmp_the()`
(my names are always this creative). We've cluttered the global function
namespace for our very trivial task.

Enter stage left, Dr. Martin Luther Lambda. His dream is promoting functions
to first-class citizens...

With lambdas, we can rewrite that entire mess to be the clean, simple,
*elegant* mess that follows:

    $bands = array( 'The All American Rejects',
            'Beck', 'Blue October',
            'The Starting Line' );
    
    usort( $bands, function($a,$b)
    {
        list($a,$b) = array_map(function($s) {
        return preg_replace('/^(a|the) *(.*)$/i','$2', $s);
        }, array($a,$b));
        return strcmp($a,$b);
    });

Notice that this code doesn't create any new functions in the global
namespace. It's slightly harder to read initially (mostly because of the
gratuitous use of the `list()` language construct), but it is vastly cleaner
and, in a word *elegant*.

(Aside: calling super geeky things elegant is not even close to pass'e yet.)

We can also now perform the operation of **[currying][3]**-partially
instantiating a function with multiple parameters. Let's say we want to apply
a function to each item in a list that adds 7 to that item. PHP has a built-in
`array_map()` function, used above, that allows us to apply a function to
every item in an array, but its argument is again a string, and we still have
to create a global-namespace function to accomplish this.

Let's just say we have a function `add()` such as

    function add($x,$y) { return $x + $y; }

and we want to create a function `add7($x)` that returns `$x + 7`. We could
simply create it:

    function add7($x){ return $x + 7; }

Now what we want to do is *partially instantiate* our `add()` function to have
a sort of 'hard-coded' first argument 7. In this way, we would define `add7()`
to be

    function add7($x){ return add(7,$x); }

We just had to create another function in the global namespace: bloating our
memory footprint and creating an obtrusive disaster of our codebase to
accomplish a trivial task.

With currying, we could simply do this:

    $add  = function()( $x, $y ) { return $x + $y; };
    $add7 = curry($add,7);

The punchline is that `curry()` *returns a function*. It's a robot that gives
birth to new robots. Elegant?

So we can increment every item in an array by 7 very simply:

    $nums = array( 1, 2, 3, 4 );
    $add  = function()( $x, $y ) { return $x + $y; };
    $nums = array_map( curry($add,7), $num );

(This example is very contrived, of course, since there was no reason to use
currying here-we could have simply had

    $nums = array( 1, 2, 3, 4 );
    $nums = array_map( function($x){ return $x + 7; }, $num );

but cut me some slack.)

**Unfortunately** `curry()` is not yet part of the PHP standard library. It's
also not inherently obvious how to implement it-the necessary language
constructs were only introduced a mere three weeks ago today.

**Fortunately**, I have implemented `curry()` for you. It's a bit ugly, but it
works. It's actually fairly fast as well (although my initial tests of it were
not exhaustive).

    function curry($fn, $arg)
    {
        return function() use ($fn, $arg)
        {
            $args = func_get_args();
            array_unshift( $args, $arg );
            return call_user_func_array( $fn, $args );
        };
    }

It's cool because you can chain it to itself. So if you wanted a function that
always returned 7, you could simply say:

     $return7 = curry(curry($add,3),4);

Or if you had a function that took three arguments and you wanted a new
function with the first two 'hard-coded' (imagine `g(x) = f(1,3,x)` from
math), you could simply "curry `f()`" twice:

    $g = curry(curry($f,3),1);

A better implementation would be for `curry()` to take a variable number of
arguments and to curry all of them in:

    $g = curry($f,3,1); // or `curry($f,1,3)` maybe?

I'll leave this as 'an exercise for the reader', but it's not too difficult to
implement.

Awesome, *n'est-ce pas*?

You, too, can have some PHP 5.3 alpha goodness by running the following
nonsense on your command line:

    mkdir -p "$HOME/src/php53alpha/build"
    cd "$HOME/src/php53alpha"
    wget http://downloads.php.net/johannes/php-5.3.0alpha1.tar.gz
    tar zxf php-5.3.0alpha1.tar.gz
    cd php-5.3.0alpha1
    ./configure --prefix="$PWD/../build"
    make
    make install

This installs the `php` binary in *~/src/php53alpha/build/bin*, so you can run
your *.php* scripts by simply calling, e.g.,

    ~/src/php53alpha/build/bin/php my_script_file.php

Also read:

 *  [PHP.net's explanation of lambdas and closures][4]
 *  [PHP.net's release notes for PHP 5.3 alpha1][2]

Enjoy.

 [1]: http://php.net
 [2]: http://www.php.net/archive/2008.php#id2008-08-01-1
 [3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currying
 [4]: http://wiki.php.net/rfc/closures
