---
layout: post
title: Permutations
category: coding
---

Today I want to show you a basic algorithm to find all the permutations
of a list. I'll call it `permute`. Some people might call it
`permutations_of` or `permutations_for` or something kinda cute like
that.

This is a classic example of a recursive algorithms question, but I
always see interview candidates mess it up.

I like to start with examples and then turn them into test-cases. Here
is what I started with:

    // Base/easy cases
    assert permute(null) == null
    assert permute([]) == [[]]

Note that the permutations of an empty list is a somewhat arbitrary
decision. I could define that the permutations of an empty list is an
empty list (you can't permute anything so there are no permutations).
Another interpretation is that there is exactly one permutation: the
list itself since this is every possible ordering of the list. Either
one is fine I think (logicians may disagree!). I get around this sort of
conundrum all the time by realizing that I can do whatever I want as
long as I document it. (This even holds true for the pillaging of native
villages.)

    // Trivial case
    assert permute([1]) == [[1]]

    // Slightly harder
    assert permute([1,2]) == [[1,2], [2,1]]

    // Case that suggests recursion
    assert permute([1,2,3]) == [ [1,2,3], [1,3,2],
                                 [2,1,3], [2,3,1],
                                 [3,1,2], [3,2,1] ]

I knew the algorithm in my head, but I didn't "see" the code until I
went to write the assertions. I think the the above assertions kind of
give away the algorithm, but the devil is in the details for this.

Working Through It
------------------

I'll use Groovy for this. It would be just as easy in pure Java, but
pure Java's data structures and syntax are kind of ugly for this
problem.

Starting point:

    List permute(List vals) {
        ?
    }

(We may come back and add generics later if we want but I want to focus
on the algorithm for now.)

First let's handle the base case:

    List permute(List vals) {
        if ( vals == null || vals.size() == 0 )
            return vals
    }

For this you earned a college degree?

It gets harder for even the case of a single-item list. It's clear you
don't want to just return your input

TODO: finish explanation :)

End Solution
------------

    void permuteHelper(List head, List tail, List sofar) {
        if ( tail.size() == 0 ) {
            sofar.add(head)
            return
        }
        for( int i=0; i<tail.size(); i++ ) {
            List newHead = [] + head + tail[i]
            List tailWithoutI = without(tail,i)
            
            permuteHelper(newHead, tailWithoutI, sofar)
        }
    }

    def without(List vals, int ix) {
        List out = []
        for(int i=0; i<vals.size(); i++) {
            if ( i != ix ) {
                out.add(vals[i])
            }
        }
        return out
    }

    List permute(List vals) {
        if ( vals == null ) 
            return null
        List out = []
        permuteHelper( [], vals, out )
        return out
    }

Criticisms and Conclusions
--------------------------

I like to go back and see what I like and what I don't like about a
solution.

**Pros**:

-   The end result is simple: the core logic is under 10 lines.
-   There is no bounds-checking in the core "helper" method, so all of
    the edge/"business" cases are pushed elsewhere allowing the core of
    the algorithm to be expressed cleanly.

**Cons**:

-   I don't like creating helper methods. Call me a purist. For this
    reason and others this solution is in some ways inelegant. This is
    *somewhat* a factor of the language.
-   There are opportunities to re-use earlier computations and
    potentially dramatically increase efficiency. In the case of
    `[1,2,3,4]`, we have to permute `[3,4]` twice.
-   The runtime of this solution is `O(n!)`, and the space required is
    `O(n)`. I could do better on time by trading some space.
-   The use of the `without()` method is kind of cheeky: a better data
    structure (or implementation) that didn't require this would save me
    a lot of runtime memory and computation.

**Further questions**:

-   What better data structure could I use?
-   If I wanted to parallelize this to find the permutations of, say,
    100 million items, what would I have to change?
-   What impacts does the language chosen have here? If I were to
    implement this in C, what would I do differently? How about Haskell?
    Scala? Clojure and Lisp dialects make list operations like this a
    lot more user-friendly.

TODO

Permutations
------------

Here is a similar strategy for finding all permutations of items:

    def permutationsHelper(List fixed, List<List> variable, List sofar)
    {
    	if ( variable.size() == 0 ) 
    	{
    		sofar.add(fixed)
    		return
    	}
        
    	List its = variable[0]
    	List toVariate = variable.size() == 1 ? [] : variable.subList(1,variable.size())
        
    	for(item in its) 
    	{
    		List nowFixed = fixed + [item]
    		permutationsHelper(nowFixed, toVariate, sofar)
    	}
    }
    
    List permute(List<List> its)
    {
    	List out = []
    	permutationsHelper([], its, out)
    	return out
    }




